# Digital technologies in linguistics
Linguistics is such a broad field of study, with many varied disciplines and paradigms, so introducing all kinds of digital technologies into linguistics would take a while. Considering this, I am going to introduce you to three digital tools that have influenced my linguistics studies at Aarhus University. These three digital tools are Praat, CLAN, and lab.ja.

## Praat
Praat is a free computer program developed by the University of Amsterdam. The software is a digital tool linguists can use to, among many other things, analyse and synthesise speech. Similar to how broad the field of linguistics is, phonetics, which is the study of speech sounds, is a basis domain of linguistics and, therefore, Praat is widely used within several linguistic disciplines when it comes to engaging with how language is spoken.
One of the fundamental analyses a first-year linguistic student at Aarhus University will be asked to do starts with producing a sentence or word and recording it using Praat. With Praat, you can then take the recorded audio file and create an acoustic waveform to measure elements of speech production. An aspect worth studying is VOT (voice onset time), the interval between the release of a stop consonant (e.g., the /p/in pay) and the onset of vocal fold vibration, also called voicing (Ladefoged 2015). To analyse attributes of speech sounds, such as VOT, Praat allows you to annotate the locations of specific speech segments in the acoustic waveform, which is very handy. Another way to investigate speech sounds is to create a spectrogram, a three-dimensional graph showing time on the horizontal axis, frequency on the vertical axis, and amplitude in a grey scale (Ladefoged 2015). Just by looking at a spectrogram, skilled linguists can identify the characteristics of the speech sound shown and make educated guesses about which spoken words the graph depicts. The spectrogram's structure is based on frequency measurements. Sonorous sounds, such as vowels, have not only a fundamental frequency but also overtones, referred to as formants, which give them the distinctive quality that allows you to identify them relative to each other (Ladefoged 2015).
Praat has many more interesting and useful tools for working with speech sounds, and it even has its own programming language, which you can use to optimise your analysis, making the process effortless. 

## CLAN
CLAN is free software developed by the TalkBank/Carnegie Mellon University team led by Brian MacWhinney (MacWhinney, B., 2020). The software is a transcription tool for linguists interested in analysing naturally occurring language use, making it easy to transcribe recorded conversations. I have met the program in relation to sociolinguistics and conversation analysis as a method. These recorded conversations can be either audio-only or audio with video. When the recording includes video, you can easily utilise everything CLAN has to offer, as it allows you to simultaneously analyse the spoken conversation, the bodily movements, and the context in which the conversation takes place. While you transcribe, you can directly link the audio and video to your transcript, making it easy to revisit single segments such as sentences, words, and pauses over and over again to get all the important information transcribed. Speaking of pauses, they are very important to conversation (Liddicoat 2022), and with CLAN, you can measure the exact gap in time between speech events. This is significant because even the slightest differences in pauses can affect how they are interpreted by the speakers involved. In addition to pauses, other elements important in examininginteractional patterns between speakers, such as turn-taking, repairs, repetitions, and interruptions, are also, because of the analytical features mentioned, made simple with CLAN, making it a useful and frequently used digital tool.

## Lab.js
lab.js is a free, open-source, online study builder that allows cognitive scientists to build behavioural experiments that run directly in a web browser (Henninger et al. 2020). These experiments can be conducted online or in the lab without requiring participants to download or install anything, as they can be accessed via a link. In a psycholinguistics course, I used Lab.js to design a linguistic experiment similar to a lexical decision task. Lab.js lets you display written text, audio stimuli, images, and videos, which can be used to design just the experiment you need to investigate the research question you wish to answer. The builder interface is very easy to use, and you do not need to know JavaScript to design your experiment, making it accessible to everyone. It also has extensive, simple documentation that explains how to use the software. With the builder, you can control when stimulus is shown and track and log reaction times and accuracy with precision. As mentioned, the designed experiment can be shared via a link, allowing you to reach a larger, more diverse sample of participants. The recorded data can be exported as a CSV file, which allows you to perform quantitative analysis using, for example, Python. Lab.js is evidently a very useful digital tool for recording quantitative data relevant to answering research questions in psycholinguistics and other fields of the behavioural sciences.

## Natural Language Processing (NLP)
Natural language processing is a field of linguistics with ties to digital technology. That statement is redundant, since NLP is also called computational linguistics. Computer scientists use the term NLP to refer to how computers process natural language. Thus, it is inherently engaged with digital technologies (Glass 2024).
The biggest disruptor to the field of linguistics at the moment, one could undoubtedly argue, is the introduction of increasingly advanced large language models (LLMs), such as the model behind OpenAI’s recently introduced chatbot ChatGPT-5. These models are capable of generating coherent, context-specific language and performing a variety of NLP tasks, including translation, text summarisation, and producing dialogue. And as such, LLMs are new tools that can perform large-scale language analysis, offering new perspectives to question the importance of linguistic experience in language acquisition and thereby challenging traditional understandings of language and cognition (Contreras Kallens, P. et al., 2023). 

## Conclusion
Depending on the linguistic discipline, the type of digital technology used will differ greatly. Any tool used to record or analyse language will be needed to thrive in linguistics, and having them be digital is just more efficient. For example, I doubt any linguist does not have a way to digitally log their work, not to mention access to digital libraries to access online research tools to find relevant literature on their topic of interest.

## References
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2025). *Praat: doing phonetics by computer* (Version 6.4.48) [Computer software]. Available at: http://www.praat.org (Accessed: 16 December 2025).<br>
Glass, L. (2024). *Language and Computers*. Language Science Press.<br>
Henninger, F. et al. (2020). *lab.js:A free, open, online study builder*. Available at: https://lab.js.org/ (Accessed: 16 December 25)<br>
Johnson, K. (2015). *A Course in Phonetics* (7th edition). Cengage Learning.<br>
Ladefoged, P., & Contreras Kallens, P. et al. (2023). Large Language Models Demonstrate the Potential of Statistical Learning in Language. *Cognitive science*. 47 (3).<br>
Liddicoat, A. (2022). *An introduction to conversation analysis*. London: Bloomsbury Academic.<br>
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyzing Talk. 3rd Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.<br>
MacWhinney, B. (2025). *CLAN: Computerized Language Analysis* (Version 04-Dec-2025) [Computer software]. Available at: https://dali.talkbank.org/clan/ (Accessed: 16 December 2025).<br>
